Amen, and please be seated.
Now, if you have a Bible, let me invite you to turn with me to Hebrews chapter two.
This morning, once again, as last week, we're taking a break from our study through the letter of Paul to the Ephesians, just to consider in light of
Christmas.
The fact that our Lord Jesus Christ is both fully God and fully man in one person.
That God became man to bring mankind back to God.
Last week we looked at John chapter 1 and the deity of Christ.
In the beginning was the Word and the Word was with God and the Word was God and the Word became flesh
and dwelt among us.
This morning we consider the humanity of our Lord Jesus.
And particularly this question, why did the eternal Son of God, creator and sustainer of the universe, take on human flesh and blood, body and soul and suffer and die?
Well, He came to face everything that stands against us
to face them and defeat them and to stand in victory over them as true man, to bring us with him in his victory.
So what foes did he face?
What victory did he win?
What opposition to us did he deal with on our behalf?
Let's consider that question from Hebrews chapter two, verses 14 through 18.
here now the holy and inspired Word of God.
Since, therefore, the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same things, that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is, the devil, and deliver all those who through fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery.
For surely it is not angels that he helps, but he helps the offspring of Abraham.
Therefore he had to be made like his brothers in every respect so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in the service of God to make propitiation for the sins of the people.
For because he himself has suffered when tempted,
He is able to help those who are being tempted.
Amen.
This is God's Word.
We write it on our hearts.
Let's pray.
Our Father in heaven, thank you that you so loved the world that you gave your only Son that whoever believes in Him should not perish but have everlasting life.
And it is because Christ has died and Christ has risen to life and ascended.
and it is seated at the right hand and carries with him all who belong to him by your grace through faith in Christ.
Bless us with that faith.
Help us to see what Jesus, what wonderful things Jesus has done for us in his name I pray.
Amen.
I couch this as, what enemies did he face?
What opposition to us did he face?
And we want to think about that
Let me start this way with Sun Zu.
The ancient Chinese military general and leader who wrote the art of war, and he wrote it in the fifth century, he said, if you know the enemy and you know yourself, you need not fear the result of 100 battles.
If you know yourself but not the enemy, for every victory gained, you will also suffer a defeat.
If you know neither the enemy nor yourself, you will succumb in every battle.
thought on war is considered so wise it's part of the U.S. Marine Corps Professional Reading Program.
It's recommended reading for all U.S. military intelligence personnel and if Wikipedia is to be believed.
Well, it's required reading for CIA officers, but I don't know how they would know that.
When you have enemies, when you have enemies, you need to know what sort of enemies you have.
What kind of weapons
Are they using?
How can you oppose them and do so effectively?
Because to be ignorant is to be defenseless.
And too often Christians don't realize the kinds, the various kinds of enemies we have that stand in opposition to us, nor do we realize what Jesus has done to face them and to free us for our safety.
everlastingly.
The writer here points us to four things that stand in opposition to us.
First, Jesus disarms the devil.
The devil is against us.
He's an enemy.
Jesus disarms the devil.
Second, you see in verse 15, he delivers us from death.
Verses 16 and 17, he diverts from us the wrath of God
In verse 18, he dispenses help in our temptation.
Let me invite you to think about those four things Jesus does for us because Jesus is in the flesh.
He shares with God's children flesh and blood.
And so first, notice in verse 14, it says, Jesus disarms the devil.
Look at that language.
Since therefore the children share in flesh and blood, he himself likewise partook of the same things.
that through death he might destroy the one who has the power of death, that is the devil.
So he destroys the one who has the power of death, that is the devil.
Now the writer here of course, as elsewhere in scripture, as Jesus himself confronted the devil, the Bible believes in the existence of a real devil and that he hates us.
That he hates us and he hates us for a variety of reasons.
He hates us because he hates God.
and we are God's creatures.
He hates us because he hates God and we are as men and women, boys and girls made in the image of God.
We were made to represent God on the earth and though that image in us is marred, it's not absent and so he still hates us and he hates you if you are a Christian who believes in Jesus all the more because
because you believe in Jesus and he stands opposed to the kingdom of Christ.
And so we learn about the devil in a variety of places.
In John 8, verse 44, Jesus says of him, the devil was a murderer from the beginning and has nothing to do with the truth because there is no truth in him when he lies.
He speaks out of his own character for he is a liar and the father of lies.
And if we don't believe,
that there is a real devil, then the Bible would say to us, well, he's already then done his work on us and effectively so.
Because the Bible does say that he masquerades as an angel of light.
So such it is that he lies to us and deceives us and he makes us think he's not there.
Or he makes us think that which is good as evil or that which is evil is good.
He lies to Christians about their relationship with God.
Satan will tell you, he'll work to inculcate in you a sense that even if you're a Christian, you're really just hopeless, that you're really just unloved by God.
And that God has, well, God's seen enough to have enough of you and is ready to cast you aside.
but you aren't hopeless and you are deeply loved and you are deeply valued by God.
You're treasured by God and his love is a steadfast covenant faithful love.
After all, God himself died for you upon the cross.
So in what sense then here does the writer mean that the devil is destroyed or defeated here?
Well, if is the apostle Peter says,
the devil is still prowling around seeking someone to devour, then it's not the kind of defeat in which the devil is already cast into the lake of fire and buried in the depths of the sea, never to be seen again.
But Jesus has bound him and the devil is on a leash, we might say, and his doom is sure
And in the like of fire is certain, but especially here in the book of Hebrews, he is disarmed.
He is defeated because he is disarmed.
That is, the weapon he had against us, Jesus has taken away.
That's the idea here in Hebrews too.
I know we don't have the whole context and such, but in the way most important to us,
Jesus made the devil impotent against us.
Now I say impotent and you say, but the Bible says he has the power of death.
Well, yes, but not absolute power.
It's not denying that God has absolute authority over the life and death of people, right?
He holds us in his hand and in him we live and move and have our being and every breath we have
is by the power of Jesus who in chapter one it says he upholds the universe by the word of his power and it means he carries it along to its appointed goal.
He sustains all things to the appointed end of the new heavens and new earth in all its finality and glory.
But though God has control of death ultimately death being the pronouncement of God upon
the sin of man, the wages of sin is death.
In a sense, the devil has the power of death, subordinately, because he what?
What does he do?
He entices us to sin, and then he accuses us of it, and he calls for God's judgment upon us because of it.
And though the devil's not infallible, often enough he has a point.
Now, he is a liar, so I'm sure he says all kinds of things about you and me that aren't true, that could be easily dismissed as falsehoods, making accusations that are wild, but also the devil knows a whole lot about humanity.
And some of what he says about us is true.
He knows the sins we've actually committed.
He knows the terrible things we've actually done or said,
or failed to do and failed to say and so on.
And he seeks to entice us into those things.
And then when we fall, he accuses us and he says, you're worthy of death and he goes before the throne to seek our eternal judgment.
He knows we deserve physical death and spiritual death and everlasting death.
But through his own death, Jesus disarmed the devil.
He took away this weapon used against us.
And Colossians chapter 2 verses 13 to 15 helps explain this at greater length.
When it says that Jesus died and God raised him from the dead.
And if you were to turn over to Colossians 2 verses 13 to 15, then if you just want to listen in, as you track the passage there, you ask, what did God do for believers?
Verse 13 at the end,
God made us alive together with Him that is with Christ, having forgiven us all our trespasses.
And how did He forgive us?
Verse 14, by canceling the record of debt that stood against us with its legal demands.
And how did He cancel this record of debt that stood against us with its legal demands?
Well, this He set aside, nailing it to the cross.
So our debt was laid to Christ's account and he paid our debt.
And what was the effect of that in Colossians 2 verse 15?
The effect of that was this, he disarmed the rulers and authorities and put them to open shame by triumphing over them in him.
Now rulers and authorities there are these technical terms for the fallen angels like the devil and his minions.
Jesus took away their weapon.
When they accuse us to God, Jesus says what?
As our advocate, he stands in our defense and says, what?
Not that they don't deserve death.
He's not a liar.
He knows the truth.
But he says, I died their death.
I suffered the wages of sin for them.
I took what they deserve.
so that we can sing with joyful exuberance.
When Satan tempts me to despair and tells me of the guilt within, upward I look and see him there, him who who made an end of all my sin.
Because the sinless Savior died.
My sinful soul is counted free.
For God the just is satisfied to look on him and pardon me.
This is because Jesus took on flesh and blood.
He shared our nature and suffered in our nature.
And so, well, let's put it this way.
By way of another illustration, Carl armoreding.
He was watching a wild cat in a zoo.
And as I stood there, he said, an attendant
entered the cage through a door on the opposite side.
He had nothing in his hands but a broom and carefully closing the door.
He proceeded to sweep the floor of the cage.
And Carl observed the worker who had no weapon to ward off the attack of the beast.
In fact, when he got to the corner of the cage where the wildcat was lying, he poked the animal with the broom in the wildcat, hissed at him, and then lay down in another corner of the enclosure.
And Carl remarked to the attendant,
You certainly are a brave man.
Now I ain't brave, he said, as he continued to sleep.
Well, then that cat must be tame.
No, no, he ain't tame.
Well, if you aren't brave and the cat isn't tame, then I can't understand why he doesn't attack you.
And the man chuckled and replied with an air of confidence, Mr.
He's old and he ain't got teeth.
Well, the devil's
threats, have no teeth against you.
His accusations don't sink into the flesh because his accusations, as it were, were dealt with by Christ upon the cross and these vicious fangs of the devil were, as it were, pulled out by Jesus upon the cross.
Now, all of that isn't to say that the devil isn't
prowling around like a roaring lion.
That isn't to say that the devil can't in this life hurt us, lie to us, deceive us, entice us to sin or try to discourage us and make us fearful and make us believe that God doesn't love us or he won't continue to forgive us.
He can cause like he did with Job, great suffering.
But a believer in Jesus is safe
from eternal everlasting spiritual harm.
So maybe you see now why the Bible tells us to resist the devil, not to flee the devil, resist the devil.
We're to flee temptation, but we're to resist the devil and James 4 says, and he will flee from you.
opposed his accusations, not by arguing your innocence, but by trusting in Christ's death for you.
Stand strong in the grace of the Lord, put on the armor of God, wear the belt of truth, take up the shield of faith with which you can extinguish all the flaming arrows of the evil one.
Martin Luther wrote it this way, the prince of darkness grim, we tremble not for him, his rage we can endure, for lo his doom is sure, one little word shall fell him.
That word above all earthly powers, no thanks to them, abideth.
What word is that?
That is the word made flesh who dwelt among us and disarmed the devil.
Now why else did
God become man.
Secondly, verse 15, deliver us from the fear of death.
Notice verse 15, that he did all this and delivers all those who the fear of death were subject to lifelong slavery.
Neil Simon, who read the odd couple in the barefoot in the park, was asked on a talk show where they're making a lot of money concerned him.
And the studio went dead silent when Simon answered, no, what does concern me is the fear of dying.
Maybe you have that kind of fear.
But Christians are, because of the gospel, to be freed in our heart and mind from this fear.
That is we have every good reason not to fear death.
And no good reason any longer to fear death.
Such it is that men like Dr. B. Meyer, the great Baptist preacher a few days before his death, wrote a very different these words.
I have just heard to my great surprise that I have but a few days to live.
It may be that before this reaches you, I shall have entered the palace.
Don't trouble the right.
We shall meet in the morning.
The morning of glory.
When John Owen, the great Puritan lay on his death bed, his secretary wrote in his name through dictation to a friend, I am still in the land of the living.
Stop said Owen, change that and say, I am yet in the land of the dying, but I hope soon to be in the land of the living.
Why such competence?
Well, the worst fear about death
is not the act of dying or the manner of dying.
The worst fear about death is not physical death.
But it is what the Bible describes as second death.
That is the eternal spiritual death of judgment from God.
And Christ has taken away what is fearful about death.
The devil can't use our sins to destroy us.
Makas, sure.
Taunt us, yes.
See, to continue to entice us,
Of course, but damn us, no.
The devil can't do it.
Christ bore the curse in our place.
So we should say a few more words here about the fear of death leading to lifelong slavery.
That's how he puts it.
We through the fear of death,
had lifelong slavery until we were liberated.
Well, why is that?
Because apart from Christ, apart from the forgiveness of sins, apart from the hope of the resurrection, the reality of eternal life and the assurance we can have of these things, apart from these things, death certainly is a thing to be feared.
Because if all that is in front of you is either nothingness or an unpleasant eternity to put in mind.
What's inviting about any of that?
Which if you believe that either nothingness or lifelong unpleasantness or eternal unpleasantness is what stands before you and that's all the hope that you have.
It's no hope at all.
It means now becomes all important, right?
You have to make the most of the time that you have here.
You have to try perhaps to extend the time as much as possible.
You have to milk it for every personal advantage in every possible pleasure because you will not have advantages and pleasures in days to come.
So the fear of death for those who are outside of Christ, it sets you up for becoming enslaved to all kinds of idolatries and excesses and indulgences.
So people are, some are in bondage to the clock, right?
Some become enslaved to their own desires and are held captive by the things that were once freedoms, some chase after the myth of eternal youth, and will sacrifice almost anything for that insatiable idol.
Some become entangled in their own possessions, owned by the very things they imagined themselves to own.
The bondage that comes through the fear of death is of...
Tomorrow we die.
Live it up now.
Live your best life now.
Get all the toys now because there's nothing good beyond the grave.
Well, that's one mentality.
But the Bible says Christ's victory delivers us from that sort of slavery.
We don't have to be held hostage by the clock or by youth or by success or by power or by status or by pleasure or by things.
So Calvin says this, although we must still meet death, let us nevertheless be calm and serene in living and dying when we have Christ going before us.
If anyone cannot set his mind at rest by disregarding death,
That man should know that he has not yet gone far enough in the faith of Christ.
Calvin is saying you're not a Christian.
He's just saying you need to appreciate what you have in Christ.
His liberty to look forward to even death.
Death is the portal through which you pass out of a world of sin and misery and into the world of happiness and holiness and glory.
So the key is that
We're more than conquerors through Him who loved us to be convinced then, as the Apostle Paul says, that neither death nor life, nor angels, nor demons, nor things present, nor things future, nor any powers, nor height, nor depth, nor anything else in all creation can separate us from the love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord.
And this is because, well, thirdly, Jesus diverts the wrath of God from us.
verses 16 and 17.
He disarms the devil, he releases us from the fear of death, and he diverts the wrath of God from us.
Verse 16 and 17, for surely it is not angels that Jesus helps, but he helps the offspring of Abraham.
Therefore, he had to be made like his brothers in every respect.
so that he might become a merciful and faithful high priest in the service of God to do what?
To make propitiation for the sins of the people.
He's the high priest who makes propitiation for the sins of the people.
What's that mean?
Well, he starts here.
It's not angels that he helps.
It's not angels he rescues.
He commands the angels to serve those Jesus is saving.
But it's not the nature of an angel that Jesus took to himself.
It's the children of God he rescues.
Those who trusted the Messiah, the Messiah promised to Abraham, people who are children of Abraham, through faith in the Messiah.
It's the nature of those brothers and sisters.
You, believers in Jesus that he took to himself, was made like you in every respect.
Hebrews 4 will say, but without sin, he never sinned.
so that he could become a merciful and faithful high priest.
Now, what is it a priest did?
What did an Old Testament priest do?
A priest represented the people before God.
A priest offered sacrifices for atonement for the sins of the people.
And a priest then assured the people that the sacrifices were acceptable and their sins were pardoned through
the offering of the death of a substitute in their place, looking forward, of course, to the true lamb who takes away the sin of the world.
And Jesus is that lamb, even as he is that priest.
And in the language of the passage, he made in his death propitiation.
That is, he turned away the wrath of God due to us for our sin by taking that wrath upon himself in our place.
When I was in seminary, we took a group of teenagers north of Jackson to a little town and a small kind of a country Baptist church for their vacation Bible school to assist them in carrying out a week-long vacation Bible school.
And there were going to be five daily messages, about five minutes long.
And we asked my friend Keith Berger to come and share.
And so Keith did and he asked for a volunteer to throw a ball as hard as he could.
Let's all watch this guy throw this thing really hard.
Some big, strong kid stood up and said, I'll do it.
He threw it real hard.
No problem.
Okay.
Then Keith asked for another volunteer and a little kid stood up and Keith
Keith took that little kid, and he moved him a few yards away, and he had him turn his back on the big kid, and he handed the big kid the ball, and he said, now, when I tell you, throw that ball as hard as you can at that little kid.
At which point, the rest of us, as youth leaders, alarm bells are going off in our heads, you can't do this.
Don't do this, what are you thinking?
But Keith proceeded, but before he said, throw the ball, he walked up,
to the little kid, and he stood between the kid and the big kid, and he wrapped his arms around him, and he said, all right, now throw it as hard as you can.
And the big kid nailed him with the ball, but the little kid was untouched.
He diverted the energy of that into himself and away from the one he rescued, and so Keith turned around and said to the group, and that's the gospel.
It's certainly an aspect of the truth of the gospel that God commanded our judgment because we were at fault for our rebellion and God wrapped himself up in humanity to suffer his own wrath and judgment for us.
It's a glorious gospel.
He took flesh and blood to function as a priest to represent us before God truly in death.
and to take on God's wrath due to our humanity, our sinful humanity.
And it's not that God has transformed or changed, but it is that God's wrath is satisfied.
And He's satisfied by Himself and in Himself.
So others have said the love of God sent the Son of God to bear the wrath of God for the people of God.
And if you're not sure if you weren't one of those people of God,
put your hope in Jesus, and you are.
Our hell, he made his, that his heaven might be made ours, says Philip Hughes.
So he disarms the devil.
He delivers us from the fear of death.
He diverts from us the wrath of God, and fourthly, Jesus dispenses help to us in our temptations, verse 18.
We'll come to Everest 18 here a second.
Even though the fear of death is taken away and we're free, some of you are saying to yourself under that discussion, yeah, but there are things about death I do fear, like how it's going to happen, how long it might take to be accomplished, all the losses that might lead up to it.
Maybe it's not the actual death you're afraid of, but dying, and understandably,
It's the degeneration involved.
It's the loss of powers, perhaps, or the humiliation of senility or the various kinds of pains we might be called to endure.
It's the sorrow of breaking away from those you love and who love you.
What then do we do is we contemplate death and say that we need not fear it,
What do we do in the face of all these trials and temptations and not despair as we contemplated?
Well, verse 18 is here to meet us for that.
It encourages us.
Verse 18, for because it says, Jesus himself has suffered when tempted, he's able to help those who are being tempted.
That he took on our nature not only to die, but to experience
dying and all the suffering and temptations of life and death.
And Jesus, the man of sorrows acquainted with death, he knows how hard it is.
As mentioned earlier in the service, he knows what it is to be
to be cruelly mocked and mistreated, to be abandoned by his closest companions, betrayed by one of his own disciples, to be arrested and falsely accused and abused and tortured and crucified.
He knows the power of temptation in all of that, the temptation to rage against God and his providence, the temptation to be bitter against God for human death,
or suffering.
He knows all of that, yet without sin, but he knows the experience of it, and so he is exactly what we need because he faced these same kinds of temptations.
Rick Phillips, who's now a PCA minister, says, quoting him, he says, when I was on the faculty of the United States Military Academy, I spent one summer with the Counseling Center during the training of new cadets.
affectionately known as beast barracks.
It's a grueling time of physical and psychological challenges under which not a few young men and women begin to crack, which is why the academy provides counselors.
I was one of several officers who oversaw the center, but the counseling was done mainly by older cadets who had been through the brutal weeks of that first summer at West Point.
The cadets, he said, had recently been through it themselves, and therefore were best equipped to help new cadets who were tempted to quit, go home, or otherwise fall into despair.
Well, Jesus understands what you were going through.
He isn't high and lifted up and untouched by the feelings of our infirmity, but Jesus humbled himself and
and stooped low to condescend to add true humanity to himself.
And so he's able to be a sympathetic, the writer says, and merciful priest when you cry out to him because he's been through it too.
And he came to help.
He is able to help as one friend helps another.
And in fact,
He could help any one of us in our troubles because the troubles he faced were harder than any trouble we face.
C.S.
Lewis put it this way, no man knows how bad he is still till he has tried very hard to be good.
He's speaking of temptation, right?
And he says, the silly idea is current that good people do not know what temptation means.
This is an obvious lie.
Only those who try to resist temptation know how strong it is.
You find out the strength of a wind by trying to walk against it, not by lying down.
A man who then gives in to temptation after five minutes simply does not know what it would have been like an hour later.
That is why, says Lewis, bad people in one sense know very little about badness.
They have lived a sheltered life by always giving in.
We never find out the strength of evil, says Lewis, until we try to fight against it.
And Christ, because He was the only man who never yielded to temptation, is also the only man who knows to the full what temptation means.
And so we celebrate.
We celebrate at Christmas, that Jesus is not only God, but He is truly human.
Having disarmed the devil, delivering us from death, diverting from us the wrath of God, and dispenses help to us in our temptations.
Once you put your hopes in Him.
Let's pray.
Our Father, thank you that this great high priest has passed through the heavens, risen from the dead, ascended, passed through the heavens now to appear in the presence of God on our behalf.
We think that he always lives to intercede for us.
And we thank you that the throne upon which he sits is the throne of grace, that we may come boldly, freely, even confidently to the throne of grace to receive mercy and help in our time of need.
O grant us hearts that always would be looking to you and help us, we pray in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Amen, let's stand together and sing.